Split explainer into 3 featuresets (#60)
fedidcg/LightweightFedCM: README.md

## Introduction

> The goal of this proposal is to create more flexibility for Identity Providers (IdPs) who wish to integrate with Federated Credential Management and the gain the benefits of more contextually-relevant user mediated access to cross-site top-level unpartitioned cookies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of this proposal is to create more flexibility for Identity Providers (IdPs) who wish to integrate with Federated Credential Management and gain the benefits of more contextually-relevant user-mediated access to cross-site top-level unpartitioned cookies.
```

This is accomplished with three proposed changes to the [FedCM specification](https://w3c-fedid.github.io/FedCM/):

> * Allow IdPs to store display information about users accounts up-front via the [Login Status API](https://w3c-fedid.github.io/login-status/#introduction), which we will refer to as "FedCM Accounts Push."
> * Allows IdPs to skip implementation of the `client_metadata_endpoint`, `id_assertion_endpoint`, `accounts_endpoint`, and the `login_url` by defining user agent semantics when any of these are not present; this will be referred to as "FedCM Optional Endpoints."
> * Allow IdPs to store endpoint configuration information up-front via the Login Status API; this will be referred to as "FedCM Config Push."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Allow IdPs to store display information about user accounts up-front via the [Login Status API](https://w3c-fedid.github.io/login-status/#introduction), which we will refer to as "FedCM Accounts Push."
* Allows IdPs to skip implementation of the `client_metadata_endpoint`, `id_assertion_endpoint`, `accounts_endpoint`, and `login_url` by defining user agent semantics when any of these are not present; these will be referred to as "FedCM Optional Endpoints."
* Allow IdPs to store endpoint configuration information up-front via the Login Status API; this will be referred to as "FedCM Config Push."
```

> It is possible to look at this proposal as an “axiomatic base” of FedCM; simplifying FedCM down to its barest essentials that will allow it to still function in a way that provides value to both users and identity providers. One benefit of this approach is it allows for incremental adoption of full FedCM by existing identity providers. It defines useful user-agent behaviors for FedCM when some of the specified endpoints are not defined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to look at this proposal as an “axiomatic base” of FedCM — simplifying FedCM down to its barest essentials that will allow it to still function in a way that provides value to both users and identity providers. One benefit of this approach is that it allows for incremental adoption of full FedCM by existing identity providers. It defines useful user-agent behaviors for FedCM when some of the specified endpoints are not defined.
```

In particular, making the `id_assertion_endpoint` optional would pave the way for Identity Providers that only require unpartitioned third-party cookie access in an iframe on a Relying Party in order to function. 

## Goals and Non-Goals

The following use cases are all motivating to this work and it is our goal to provide an easy-to-integrate solution for them that can be integrated into the Credential Manager as a unified browser-mediated login mechanism.

These changes are intended to:
* Allow IdPs to request Storage Access with a UI that gives users more context for their choices.
* Provide the benefits of the FedCM UX to IdPs whose system architecture or engineering budget does not permit adoption of full FedCM.
* Improve performance and privacy properties of FedCM by optionally moving credentialed calls to IdPs to a later point in the sign-in user journey.

These changes explicitly must *not*:

> * Make invisible or silent timing attacks possible for a colluding IdP and RP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Enable invisible or silent timing attacks for a colluding IdP and RP.
```

// navigator.login.setStatus("logged-out"); undoes the prior operation
```

Then, when an RP calls `navigator.credentials.get()` with the appropriate configuration for `example.com` to begin the FedCM signin or signup flows, the user's browser will not have to make a credentialed request to the `accounts_endpoint` defined in `fedcm.json`; instead, the browser-controlled account selector will be displayed immediately, using the accounts list that was previously stored by the IdP. If the account information has expired, the browser will either invoke the `accounts_endpoint`, or, if the `accounts_endpoint` isn't defined in the IdP's configuration, navigate to the `login_url` (when `mode: active`) or terminate the flow and reject the returned promise (when `mode: passive`).

```
const credential = await navigator.credentials.get({
  identity: {providers: [{configURL: "https://example.com/fedcm.json"}]}

>   });

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
});
```

The `client_metadata_endpoint` is already [effectively optional in Chrome](https://github.com/w3c-fedid/FedCM/issues/701#issuecomment-2666184937), and the intention is to update the specification to match the implemented behavior.

### ID Assertion Endpoint

IdPs may not need to return any sort of token to the relying party, instead relying on unpartitioned third-party cookie access in an embedded IdP iframe on the RP site. If the IdP does not define an `id_assertion_endpoint`, the `IdentityCredential` that is returned by the RP's `navigator.credentials.get()` call will have an empty string for the `token` value.

### Login URL

If the `login_url` is not defined in the IdP API configuration, cases where the browser would have opened `login_url` will instead navigate to the origin of the URL specified in the provider configuration in the `navigator.credentials.get()`. 

```
const credential = await navigator.credentials.get({
  identity: {providers: [{configURL: "https://example.com/fedcm.json"}],
             mode: "active"}

>   });

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
});
```

```

## FedCM Config Push

An IdP may prefer to define the API configuration of their deployment by pushing the configuration to the user's browser when the user successfully logs in.

We propose doing this via the LoginStatus API. Example:

```
// On idp.example
navigator.login.setStatus("logged-in", {

> 	apiConfig: {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  apiConfig: {
```

    accounts_endpoint: "https://idp.example/api/accounts",
    id_assertion_endpoint: "https://idp.example/api/id_assertion",
    login_url: "https://idp.example/signin",
    disconnect_endpoint: "https://idp.example/api/disconnect",
    branding: {
      icons: [{url: "https://idp.example/fedcm-icon-32.png", size: 32"}]
    }
  }
  expiration: 86_400_000 // 24 hours
})
```

Most features of "Full" FedCM should still be available if the `navigator.login.setStatus` implementation route is chosen. The exceptions are outlined below.

> ### `client_metadata_endpoint` ❌

Reviewer 2: Saying explicitly "supported", "not supported", or "partially supported" might be clearer than "❌" as I needed to read the full description to understand that this config parameter was not allowed and that this was what the marking meant. 

```suggestion
### `client_metadata_endpoint`: Not supported
```

// navigator.login.setStatus("logged-out"); undoes the prior operation
```

> Then, when an RP calls `navigator.credentials.get()` with the appropriate configuration for `example.com` to begin the FedCM signin or signup flows, the user's browser will not have to make a credentialed request to the the `accounts_endpoint` defined in `fedcm.json`; instead, the browser-controlled account selector will be displayed immediately, using the accounts list that was stored by the IdP earlier. If the account information has expired, the browser will either invoke the `accounts_endpoint`, or, if the `accounts_endpoint` isn't defined in the IdP's configuration, navigate to the `login_url` (when `mode: active`) or terminate the flow and reject the returned promise (when `mode: passive`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, when an RP calls `navigator.credentials.get()` with the appropriate configuration for `example.com` to begin the FedCM signin or signup flows, the user's browser will not have to make a credentialed request to the `accounts_endpoint` defined in `fedcm.json`; instead, the browser-controlled account selector will be displayed immediately, using the accounts list that was previously stored by the IdP. If the account information has expired, the browser will either invoke the `accounts_endpoint`, or, if the `accounts_endpoint` isn't defined in the IdP's configuration, navigate to the `login_url` (when `mode: active`) or terminate the flow and reject the returned promise (when `mode: passive`).
```

```
const credential = await navigator.credentials.get({
  identity: {providers: [{configURL: "https://example.com/fedcm.json"}]}
  });
```

## FedCM Optional Endpoints

> Some IdPs may not require all aspects of the FedCM flow in order to provide a useful experience to users and RPs. It might be useful for an IdP to not define some endpoints in the [IdentityProviderAPIConfig](https://w3c-fedid.github.io/FedCM/#dictdef-identityproviderapiconfig), rather than implementing stubs. If they define none of them, no IdP configuration should be required at all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some IdPs may not require all aspects of the FedCM flow to provide a useful experience to users and RPs. It might be useful for an IdP to not define some endpoints in the [IdentityProviderAPIConfig](https://w3c-fedid.github.io/FedCM/#dictdef-identityproviderapiconfig), rather than implementing stubs. If they define none of these endpoints, no IdP configuration should be required at all.
```

### Accounts Endpoint

If the IdP is making use of FedCM Accounts Push, then it should be permitted to not define an `accounts_endpoint` in their IdP config. If no `accounts_endpoint` is defined and there are no stored accounts from Accounts Push for the IdP, the user agent behavior for credential requests will be identical to the case where an empty list is returned from the `accounts_endpoint`.

### Client Metadata Endpoint

> Not all IdPs may want to use the browser-mediated UI for displaying links to the RP's Terms of Service and Privacy Policy; for instance, in the IdP Registration model, the IdP and RP may not have a pre-existing relationship such that the IdP could respond meaningfully to a request to the `client_metadata_endpoint`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some IdPs may not want to use the browser-mediated UI for displaying links to the RP's Terms of Service and Privacy Policy; for instance, in the IdP Registration model, the IdP and RP may not have a pre-existing relationship such that the IdP could respond meaningfully to a request to the `client_metadata_endpoint`.
```

});
```

### `accounts_endpoint` ✔️

> Since the `accounts_endpoint` is invoked without referrer details, it shouldn't cause an IdP to become aware of the user's visit to an RP, even if the IdP is allowed to define it via `setStatus` and not require a matching `.well_known/web-identity` and JSON config URL. Since credentials are already being sent with the request, link decoration by the IdP would not provide them with any new information. Because the `setStatus` is occurring on the IdP's origin ahead of time, there's no way to smuggle the RP's identity to the IdP before the user has linked their identity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since the `accounts_endpoint` is invoked without referrer details, it shouldn't cause an IdP to become aware of the user's visit to an RP, even if the IdP is allowed to define it via `setStatus` and not require a matching `.well_known/web-identity` and JSON config URL. Since credentials are already sent with this request, link decoration by the IdP would not provide them with any new information. Because the `setStatus` is called on the IdP's origin ahead of time, there's no way to smuggle the RP's identity to the IdP before the user has linked their identity.
```

## Interaction with other FedCM Features

The FedCM features addressed here should not be considered exhaustive; instead, this outlines features where special consideration is
required. Unless otherwise stated, any FedCM functionality should be available to IdPs taking advantage of Accounts Push, Optional Endpoints, or Config Push. 

Features that should work with no modification include:

* Multiple identity providers in one `navigator.credentials.get()` call.
* Login, Domain, and Account Hints for accounts filtering.
* Fields and params for identity assertion retrieval.
* `IdentityProvider.getUserInfo()` (in an iframe with an origin matching the IdP origin)

### "Login-Status" Headers

> An IdP sending the `Login-Status: logged-in` response header refreshes the expiration timer on the stored profile information by resetting the browser's last-modified timestamp for that site's Login Status information.

Reviewer 2: Below, but farther than GitHub will let me comment: The n.l.setStatus example has indentation issues.

## Interaction with other FedCM Features

> The addressed FedCM features here should not be considered exhaustive; instead, this outlines features where special consideration is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The FedCM features addressed here should not be considered exhaustive; instead, this outlines features where special consideration is
```

         // ... other fields
         approved_clients: ["https://rp.example"],
         // ... other fields
  }]
});
```

## Open Questions

* Should we allow defining the profile information and API config in the `Login-Status` header?
* Does expiration also expire the IdP-supplied `apiConfig` or just the account information?
* Should it be possible to specify expiration times on a per-account basis?
* Should it be possible to add or remove individual accounts from the list instead of replacing the entire account list?
* Does `Login-Status: logged-out` clear the IdP-supplied `apiConfig?`
* Should the API config be supplied using a call to the IdP registration API instead?
* For `approved_clients`, should we support matching on the RP origin, not just the clientId?

## Detailed design discussion

### A light touch from the browser

> One core principal of this design is to get out of the identity provider's way as quickly and as much as possible. The purpose of UI when using this API should be to gather user consent to the linking of information between sites and then do no more. Account selection, account data storage, policy presentation, and capability selection are all things we do not want to do as a browser as they are difficult and there is already an industry dedicated to solving these challenges. As such, each credential represents a connection to an identity provider, not an identity.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One core principal of this design is to get out of the identity provider's way as quickly and as much as possible. The purpose of UI when using this API should be to gather user permission to the linking of information between sites and then do no more. Account selection, account data storage, policy presentation, and capability selection are all things we do not want to do as a browser as they are difficult and there is already an industry dedicated to solving these challenges. As such, each credential represents a connection to an identity provider, not an identity.
```

consent tends to be a very overloaded term

> One core principal of this design is to get out of the identity provider's way as quickly and as much as possible. The purpose of UI when using this API should be to gather user consent to the linking of information between sites and then do no more. Account selection, account data storage, policy presentation, and capability selection are all things we do not want to do as a browser as they are difficult and there is already an industry dedicated to solving these challenges. As such, each credential represents a connection to an identity provider, not an identity.

Reviewer 3: Overall this sentence feels a bit less applicable to "accounts push" vs. a full new API alternative - do we really think that account selection and account data storage are not things the browser should ever do?

Author: I should probably rewrite this paragraph. It's a holdover from the original explainer from last year. Some of the principles are still applicable but the details are wrong.

Using the Login Status API for the IdP side reflects that what is being stored is not, in and of itself, a credential. It is a declaration of the availability of a credential, with information to make it clear to the user what that credential is. It also definitively answers questions about how this functionality should behave if the user has been `Login-Status: logged-out` by an IdP.

> ## Considered alternatives

Reviewer 2: Above, but GitHub won't let me comment that far: "and then do no more."
